Who can claim
You can claim relief if you inherit goods from a deceased person and are:
a
UK resident
a non-profit making company established in the UK
In nearly all cases, you cannot claim relief before the death of a current owner. Even if you know that the goods are left to you in the will of the current owner. The only time you can claim relief is if:
the goods were left to the current owner in the will of a deceased person
the will of that deceased person also stipulates that on the death of the current owner, the goods are to pass to you
you can prove that the current owner has renounced ownership or been judged too ill or infirm to manage their own affairs
you can provide a certificate or document given under the laws of the country concerned, stating that you can take the property absolutely under the terms of the will of the deceased person
In other situations, the goods will not qualify for the relief dealt with in this guidance.
Claiming relief if the benefactor died in the UK
You can claim relief if the benefactor was a resident:
of the UK, and their property was located outside the UK at the time of their death
outside the UK, and their property had already been temporarily admitted into the UK at the time of the benefactor’s death
What you can claim relief on
You can get relief for any personal goods that you inherit as part of the deceased’s estate.
Examples include:
jewellery
stamp collections
bicycles and private motor vehicles
caravans and trailers
pleasure craft and private aircraft
Other examples include:
household furnishings
family pets and saddle animals
portable items (such as doctor’s bag, musicians’ instruments, photographers’ cameras and equipment) used by the deceased in their trade or profession
Goods you cannot claim relief on
You cannot claim relief for:
alcoholic drinks, tobacco and tobacco products
stocks of raw materials and finished or semi-finished products
tools of trade other than the portable items
commercial vehicles
livestock and stocks of agricultural products which are more than what are required to meet a family’s normal needs
goods bought from the executor of the estate
goods bought or received as a gift from the person who legally inherited them
Before you claim
You should check if your goods are strictly controlled and if you will need an
import licence
.
When you get the
commodity code
for your goods using the tariff it will tell you if you need a licence.
When to claim relief
You should claim relief at the time of import. If you do not do this, we may accept a late claim and repay the appropriate charges
subject to conditions
.
Proof of inheritance
When importing goods you must provide a:
copy of the will, or legal documents if the deceased died intestate, certified by the executor of the estate or by a person responsible for winding up the deceased’s estate
declaration on
form C1421
This is to:
prove you are entitled to relief
identify the goods and their value in question
If the goods are not precisely identified in the will or other legal documents (perhaps they form all or part of the residue of the estate), we will need a list of the goods and their approximate value — this must be made by the executor or other legal person responsible for winding up the deceased person’s estate along with a confirmation that title to the goods passed to you.
If any of the documents mentioned are in a foreign language it will help us if you provide a certified translation at importation.
Using someone else to act on your behalf
You can
use someone else
to complete entries on your behalf but you must make sure you give clear written instructions for the goods that you’re claiming relief on.
How to claim
Goods imported in baggage
If you import the goods in your baggage you must:
declare them to us at the Customs Red Channel or Red Point
produce evidence to satisfy us that the conditions of the relief are met
claim relief by
completing an import declaration
If you cannot produce the necessary supporting documentation or evidence to show you are entitled to this relief, you must give us financial security (normally a cash deposit or a banker’s guarantee) to cover either the duty or VAT, or both, before we will release the goods. We will discharge the security later if we are satisfied you qualify for relief.
Goods imported as freight
Claim relief by completing an import declaration on the Customs Declaration service.
The Additional Procedure Codes for this relief are:
C04 — for personal property inherited by an individual
C44 — for personal property inherited by a legal persons engaged in non-profit making activity
You must enter this code in DE 1/11 to declare that you’re using this relief (this is where you can claim relief from import duties). If you’re eligible to claim VAT relief, code F45 must also be declared in DE 1/11.
If you are bringing goods from a Special Fiscal Territory, such as from the Channel Islands to Great Britain, you must also use Additional Procedure Code F15 in DE 1/11.
If you cannot produce the necessary supporting documentation or evidence to show you are entitled to this relief, you must give us financial security (normally a cash deposit or a banker’s guarantee) to cover either the duty or VAT, or both, before we will release the goods. We will discharge the security later if we are satisfied you qualify for relief.
Find out more information about how to:
declare goods under this relief, including how to evidence eligibility to use the relief can be found in:
Appendix 2: DE 1/11: Additional Procedure Codes of the Customs Declaration Service (CDS)
complete an import declaration on the Customs Declaration Service in the
CDS Declaration Completion Instructions for Imports
Goods imported by post
Ask the sender to write ‘Inherited goods: relief claimed’ clearly on the package and its accompanying customs declaration.
We may send you a simplified form to complete. You will need to return the completed form together with the documents and declaration.
If the package is not clearly marked it may not be delivered until you have paid the duty and VAT.
You should pay these charges and then write to customs at the postal depot where the charges were raised. Enclose with your letter a completed
form C1421
and the supporting proof of entitlement together with the document showing the charges. If we are satisfied that the goods qualify for relief, we will repay the duty and VAT.
Find out more information about
importing goods by post
.
Time limits for the arrival of goods in the UK
You should import the goods within 2 years from the date the estate is finally settled.
The goods do not need have to arrive in the UK at the same time, but you must provide the proof of inheritance each time the goods are imported.
If you consider that exceptional circumstances apply and you cannot import the goods within this period, you should provide evidence to support your claim to the
National Imports Relief Unit.
After you’ve claimed
If you dispose of your goods
You must tell the
National Imports Reliefs Unit
if you dispose or transfer your goods to another entity.
Records you must keep
You must keep:
any National Imports Relief Unit acknowledgement letters
receipts
bills
invoices
insurance documents
You need to keep additional records if:
you transfer goods to another approved entity — keep any official documentation detailing transfer between you and the other entity
you re-export the goods — keep the National Export System declaration details or export documentation providing information about the date of export
your are goods stolen, lost or destroyed — keep police or insurance incident reports, or official documentation providing details of the date of the incident or loss
You must keep all records for a minimum of 4 years.
If you break the conditions of the relief
If you no longer meet the conditions of the relief, you must immediately notify the
National Import Reliefs Unit
orally, electronically, or in writing.
Provide full details of the importation and why you think the conditions of the relief have been breached.
If you want to appeal
Appeal if you disagree with a decision
made by HMRC.