Watch a video about how creative industry tax reliefs work.
What are creative industry tax reliefs and how do they work?
Who can claim
Your company must be responsible for:
pre-production
principal photography
post-production
delivery of the completed programme
Your company must also:
be actively engaged in planning and decision-making
directly negotiate, contract and pay for rights, goods and services
Programmes commissioned together are treated as one programme.
Check if your company qualifies as the production company
before claiming the relief.
Cultural test
To qualify for creative industry tax reliefs, high-end television programmes must be certified as British. They must pass a cultural test or qualify through an internationally agreed co-production treaty.
The British Film Institute manages certification and qualification on behalf of the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.
The British Film Institute will issue:
an interim certificate for uncompleted work
a final certificate where production has finished
You can
find more information about certification and applying on the British Film Institute website
.
Check if the programme qualifies for the tax relief
Your company can claim the relief on a programme if:
the programme is certified as British by the British Film Institute
the programme is intended for broadcast to the general public — this includes streaming online
the programme is a drama, comedy or documentary
at least 10% of the total core costs relate to activities in the UK
the average core costs are at least £1 million per hour of slot length
the slot length in relation to the programme is greater than 30 minutes
it started principal photography on or before 31 March 2025
Core costs are what’s spent on pre-production, principal photography and post-production.
Your company cannot claim the relief if the programme:
is an advertisement or promotional programme
is a news, current affairs or discussion programme
is a quiz or game show, panel show, variety show, or similar programme
consists of or includes an element of competition or contest
is a broadcast of live events, including theatrical and artistic performance
is produced for training purposes
You can
check if the production qualifies for the relief
.
What you can claim
You can claim an additional deduction to reduce your profits or to increase a loss. This will reduce the amount of any Corporation Tax you will need to pay.
The additional deduction will be the lower of either:
80% of total core costs
the amount of UK core costs
If you make a loss, some or all of this loss can be surrendered for a payable tax credit at a rate of 25%.
Work out
how much creative industry tax relief
you can claim for your production.
When you can claim
You may make, amend or withdraw a claim for High-end Television Tax Relief up to one year after the company’s filing date.
For accounting periods beginning on or after 1 April 2024, you may make, amend or withdraw a claim for High-end Television Tax Relief up to 2 years after the end of the period of account the claim relates to.
HMRC may agree to accept late claims in some circumstances.
How to claim
Watch a video about how to claim creative industry tax relief.
How to make a claim for creative industries tax relief
Claim the tax relief on your
Company Tax Return
.
You will need to calculate the amount of:
additional deduction due to your company
any payable credit due
You must submit an
additional information form
as evidence for your claim for creative industry tax reliefs.
For each production you must provide:
a British cultural certificate from the British Film Institute — if you send an interim certificate, you must send in the final certificate when the programme is complete and the certificate must be in date when you submit it
statements of the amount of core costs, split by UK and non-UK costs
a breakdown of costs by category
Closure of High-end Television Tax Relief from 1 April 2027
You cannot claim High-end Television Tax Relief for any productions that start principal photography after 31 March 2025.
The relief will close for all productions from 1 April 2027.
You may be able to claim an
Audio-Visual Expenditure Credit
for any productions that you cannot claim High-end Television Tax Relief for.
Get more information
You can find more information, including examples of how the relief is calculated, in the
Television Production Company Manual
.